So let's start up again. Very
few students in the class.
Wondering why?
So. Today we're going
to start the next chapter,
the chapter. 4 which is
basically about a topic. I mean
combinational logic.
But before I start, I mean,
let's make sure everyone has the
focus to the slides. So please
send me. I mean like previous
works, send me some feedback
that I can make sure that you
are listening to the lecture.
Thank you, Nelson.
Thank you Deanna.
Thank you, thank you AJ.
Justin J Dennis.
Riley, OK, let's start. Thank
you, Ethan. .
Ah, uh, so far we know how
to design A logic circuit based
on the combination of some logic
gates for any given problem.
But today we're going to focus
on some, um, common or
essential logic circuits that
are, I mean, important for any
computing system such as
computers. So although you can
design logic circuit for any
purpose, but from now on we're
going to build the computer. So
we are going to build some logic
units or logic circuits that are
essential for any computing
system. Logic circuits can be
divided into 2 main categories,
combinational circuits or
combination logic. Or sequential
one. So this chapter is about
combination. But let's see what
we mean by the combination of
logic. And the combination of
logic. Basically what we've done
so far with us all in this
category of combinational logic
we have n binary variables in
the input. As you can see here
and based on some logic gates
inside the circuit, we output
some binary variables such as
which is really represented as
Boolean functions for some M
output or m output functions.
So inside this circuit, if we
write the Boolean function as a
sum of minterms, you have two
levels of gates, one level of
and the second level is the OR.
If we write the Boolean
functions for the outputs on the
product of maxterms, we have two
levels of gates, one level of
OR, one level of, and we said
that we can transform the sop
to Nand circuit. Also, we
can transform the POS to  nor.
Only Gates circuit, so all
of these designs are
considered combination.
However, the sequential logic is
a combination of logic plus in
new concept called feedback.
Feedback means that one or more
of the inputs actually is
feeding from the output Boolean
function. So it's kind of effect
from output to the input, so we
haven't done such a mean logic
circuit so far. In the next
chapter, we're going to learn
how we can do such a thing.
And the analysis of such a
mean sequential logic is
hyphen from combination logic,
but will cover the next
chapter. And I mean in the
future we're in the weeks in
the future. But this is the
main difference. So
combinational logic sequential
logic.
For combination of logic, the
main properties that as long as
we have the value for the input
variables. With some propagation
delay, or I mean kind of tie
means spending a little bit
time. We can have the values for
the output Boolean functions. So
at anytime if the value of input
is present by some deley, we can
have the value of the outputs.
So I put it here an example a.
For instance. The most simplest
logic circuit is just a circuit
with one logic and.
So if we have the value of X&Y
within the time, so we just
little bit delay, which we call
it propagation dilay or gate
delay. You can read about delay
in the logic gates in this link
in the Wikipedia for the
electronics, so takes a little
bit time to change the value of
output based on the value of the
input. So for instance, if X&Y
are both one so 1 1.
And become one so it takes a
little bit time to make it from
the default value in the
positive logic. Default value is
0, meaning that there is no
power low voltage. It takes a
little bit time to raise the
voltage to one to show the end
of X&Y. And at this time you see
that Y becomes 0.
So at this time the half the
output function must be because
zero and one is 0. So we have to
change from 1 to the zero, so we
have to reduce the high voltage
to low voltage.
So again, there is a delay here.
And etc. So here the both X and
Y are 0, so there is no need to
change it output function F, so
it remains zero up until here at
this time, y becomes 1 X
becomes one? So the output going
to be one on one which is 1. So
we have to change the low
voltage too high voltage for and
so it takes a little bit time
and then we have one here.
And so forth and so on. So
you see that I mean at
anytime if we, the value of
the input is present by
some delay we have the
value of output. So you can
make this logic and more
complex, including two three
levels, etc. gates and then
calculate the delay for the
output function.
However, in this course.
We assume the propagation
delay is 0, meaning that we have
ideal gates. There is no delay.
So unless the problem states
that the gates you buy in the
market or it's available for
your design or have having
delays and this is the delay
Lt. But otherwise, if there's no
statement about the delay, we
assume that the delay is 0. So
without the delay right away.
After the value of the input, we
have the value of the output, so
X&Y, the one to the and of them,
or one suddenly y becomes 0
right away zero, and one becomes
a. Zero source right away, the F
becomes 0 and etc.
here for instance, you see that, uh,
suddenly the x becomes one.
y was already one? So one and
one becomes one. So right away
we have the one in the output.
So this is the way the
combinational logic works.
Uh, there's a difference
for the sequential logic.
We'll discuss it. I mean,
as I said in the future.
So as I said, what we've done so
far, all this category,
combination logic or combination
circuit. So we for designing.
logic circuit actually, uh, with a
design the truth table for that
problem, but the truth table we
have to determine the number of
input variables, the number of
output variables and can name 4
input variables, and output
variables and after that we have
to see the output variables. If
you are going to write it as a
product of max term, we have to
look at those entries. That makes
the output Zero for the sum of
product or SOP we will have to
see those entries.
makes output one and after writing
the Boolean function for each of
the binary outputs, binary
variables in the output.
Hey, you try to minimize it to
use less number of gates and
those gates with less number of
inputs. Immediate solution was
Boolean algebra for one or two
input variables, an low number I
mean a smaller number of
minterms or maximum it is OK,
but if the number of input
variables increases to four.
Us three or four, we can use
the karnaugh to on a map to
minimize it, and if it
increases to five, six or
more, we can use the Queen
McCluskey algorithm to
minimize the Boolean function
you have to do this for each
of the function and then
finally rewrite the sketch or
draw the logical logic diagram.
These are the four many steps in
designing any combination logic.
But as I said today, you are
going to focus on some essential
or common logic circuits for
building a computer system. So
from now on the focus is what
units are essential for doing
for any computer system.
So the combination of logic
can be categorized. All
those designs can be
categorized into three main
uh groups. Those designs
that basically solve the
arithmetic problems or
logical problems. I mean,
doing and or not, etc. Or
doing, adding to fraction
multiplication or division?
those logic units that needs
for data transmission? You know
that? I mean the computer
system. All the data goes to
memory and then for processing
from the memory it goes the CPU
and etc. So we need some logic.
We need to build some logic unit
to do the data transmission.
Also there are some logic in
it's essential for computing
system for doing coding so.
In this course, we're going
to cover in each of these
categories were going to
cover these units, but the
arithmetic and logic we are
going to cover. The binary
adder, subtracter
multiplier, and the Division
division we going to cover
it. I mean, later, or we can
leave it for you as an
assignment, because if you
know this subtraction, we
can design the division.
The same is multiply. If you
know the addict, you can do
the multiplication. Also,
binary comparator magnitude
comparator for the second
category we got, we're going
to introduce decoder and
encoder multiplexer or
demultiplexer. And the
for coding part.
from the chapter one. There were
some binary codes we didn't
cover that we said that I
promised that will cover it
later in. This part will cover
the binary codes and the logic
circuits to do the coding.
Binary coded decimal excess-3
Gray,and other binary codes.
So let's start with the first
category. So today we're going
to introduce 2 famous or
essential logic units for doing
arithmetic. I binary adders
and binary subtractors.
So any questions so far before
starting the first essential
unit for computing system?
No questions.
So let's continue.
Binary adder. The adder thing
that we are going to design A
logic circuit does the addition,
but on the binary numbers.
So here's the design problem. A
here's the problem, and we want
to design A logic circuit for
that. The question is designed.
The logic circuit that adds two
binary digits not binary
numbers, binary digit binary
digit means that just two bits.
So just we already found the
lab assignment. We know that
binary digit is called also
called bits. So we just wanted
to design A logic circuit. Does
addition for two gates.
So like any other design
problem, we have to 1st examine
the range of the input based on
the question, we know that we're
going to add to bit, so the
range of the inputs are 2.
So we need 2 binary variables.
We can name these two binary
variables X&Y A B or whatever you
like. For instance X one X2 Y1 Y2
whatever you like.
But as long as you pick the
name, you have to be consistent
through up until the end of the
design. so.
For the input variables are
chose this variables X&Y for the
first and second bit.
And then the next is, uh, we
we've done with the range of the
input. We have to see what is
the range of the outputs and
then choose binary variables for
the output function.
So based on 2 bits in the input,
if we do the adding so 0 0
becomes 0011101 one and one
makes it 2. So we have to
represent 2 in binary system.
So we have to divide it by two.
The remainder and the quotient
goes as a carry to the next
step. So here sorry, we put the
remainder in the sum and, uh.
Quotient goes to the.
Carry, so the third, the only
case that creates a new carry
with value one, is the last one.
But both the bits are one, so we
can assume that the carry exists
for other bits. But with the
value of 0.
So as you can see here for
the output of adding two
bits, we can have two bits in
the output, one is the sum
and one is for the carry.
So any 2 bit.
Good sum and carry.
And, uh, one of them is 0 or
both or zero. The carries zero
and both of them are one. The
Carry gonna be 1.
So this is the range of the
output. Only two bits. One is
for the carry ones for this
sum. c and S.
And when we know the range of
the input range of the output
with the name variable name for
the input variables with the
variable names for the output.
So we have to create the truth
table. And then see in what
entry output functions makes
becomes one. So for the carry.
0 0 there is no carry. 01 There is no
carry 10 if you add is no
carry but the only cases both
X&Y is 1, so they are gonna be
1. For the sum of 2 bits,
0 + 0 zero 0 + 1, one 1
+ 0 one and 1 + 1 becomes 2.
Make a reminder a 2 / 2
remainder goes here and
Carry goes to on. The
question goes to carry here.
So this is the truth table. So
when we know the truth table, we
have to just simply write the
Boolean function for the output
variables as a sum of minterms or
product of maxterms.
For the carry the min term, the
only min term is minterm 3, which
is X&Y. For the sum, we have two
minterms. minterm one and minterm 2
so this is the minterm one and
meeting and after that we know
the Boolean functions are in the
sum of midterms, so we have to
simplify if it is possible. So
this is the most simplest form
for the Carriy. We cannot
simplify it more, but this one
again we cannot simplify it more
using the Boolean algebra or
karnaugh map with two variables.
We cannot simplify it more.
So, but you know that this is
the famous gate,  Y'X or
y x'? We already knew
what is the gate for this
exclusive or gate?
So, and here is the
logic circuit for our
design. Carry is X&Y.
And the sum is x.
And y Bar or y and x'?
Which is the exclusive OR of X&Y?
So here is the exclusive or and
s this is the most simplest.
Logic units for adding to only
two bits. Usually we show this.
We call this half, adder the
name for this because we just
add  2 bits and do these two
bits are X&Y just to each of
them has only one position or
one available space for that?
Visually show this like this.
Two inputs, like sum of
2 bits and then the output.
sum and carry and as a black
box we show it as they have
adder. So inside this these two
gates but as black box. This is
the half adder in the market.
When you go to the market and
buy a half adder and it looks like I
see looks like this.
So that was very limited
though, because it can
that logic only. It is
only able to add 2 bits.
Our goal is to add 2 binary
numbers, not just only two bits.
So let's design this.
So for the.
The binary numbers. We have two
again. The same design steps you
have to figure out we have to
create the truth table for the
truth table. We have to figure
out whether the.
What is the what? What are the
number of binary binary
variables in the input?
And what are the number of
binary variables in the output?
But the input imagine you're
going to add 2 binary numbers
within the range 0 to 3 in decimal.
When it convert to the binary
system, it becomes 000110 and 1
one. So for each number we need
2 bit. So imagine we are given
two binary numbers X&Y X going to
have two bits.
y gonna have two bit? So in
total we gonna have 4 bit or 4
input binary variables.
So for the X I picked this name X
One X2 for the two binary
variables for regarding the x.
For the y I pick Y1 and Y2 for
the two bits, binary number
Y. So in total we're gonna have
four binary variables in the
input X, one X2 Y1 Y2.
But next, after, after
determining the number of binary
variables in input, the next
step is the number of binary
variables in the output.
So here's an all the combinations
of binary numbers within the
range of zero to three. Adding
them together for the first
number, we're going to have four
combination, 00011011 for the
second number, same. So, in
total we're gonna have 4 by 4 16
different combinations, so we
can start from the first one.
SO 0 0 plus 00 becomes 00 and the
carry. no carry these 2
#0 + 1 makes it one is no carriers.
0 + 2.
Next 2 there's no Carry and up
until the last combination,
which is the the binary number.
X2 bits is 1, one binary number
Y with two bits becomes 11. So
when we do the addition it
becomes 1 + 1.
becomes zero.
And then a carry because because
it becomes too so zero. and
carry goes here and then this
carry 1 + 1 + 1 becomes three,
so three is 1 and carry it one.
So the result of 3 + 3 becomes
6. six means that the sum is 1
zero and the carry is 1.
So you can see that in all these
cases, with the binary numbers
in the input with two bits.
Uh, the output gonna be
three bits.
So X one X2 plus Y1Y2 becomes
S1 S2 in the sum and a carry.
So we gonna have 3 binary
variables in the output carry
over C S1 and S2 as is sum of
the addition.
So the next step is created
truth table for that X one
X2Y1Y2 the input variables and
in the right side of the truth
table we have the output
variables carry as a function
one. F2 is S1 F3 is the
S2.
And then so the next step is
right. The carry as a sum of
minterms or product maxterms for
those entries, zero, same for
S1S2. And then we can discuss
the logic circuit.
But The thing is, although we
can design A logic circuit for
adding two binary numbers with
two bits, but let's reuse what
we've designed so far. I mean,
we said that we usually build
these smallest logic circuits
and then we create a larger
logic units based on this
smaller logic unit. So you
we already. Design the half adder
to adding two bits so the
question is that can I reuse a
half adder? Plus some I mean
additional gates to create.
An adder that can show numbers
with two bits. Or is it possible
to buy two half adder?
Uh, and then connect these two
half adder in a way that does this
addition for two bits.
So if you're given 2 numbers
with two bits, we are going to
going to design logic circuit,
but using reusing 1 half adder
additional gates for two half
adder additional gates. Let's
see how can we do that.
So here is the problem. Adding
two binary numbers, each of
which has 2 bits. But we can
assume that. A fair bit X
one and Y bought one can be
added. by one half adder?
And the second a bit
X2 and Y2 can be added
by another half adder.
So the result of the first half
adder gonna be S1. The result of
the second half after going to
be S2. But the problem is that
the half adder doesn't accept
carry for the second bit X 2 + Y
two. If we use the half adder,
it cannot accept the carry from
the first bit.
So if we could extend the half
adder in a way that it except a
carry, then we can use two half
adder that can do the addition
for numbers with two bits.
So again, if you're
given two half adder.
So the 1st goes here X1 and
Y1. Using the half adder and
For the second half, other X2
and Y2 goes here to do the S2
and a carry. But the problem is
that the the carry from the adding
to the first 2 bits. So how can
we handle this?
As I said, I mean, for instance,
in this case 1 and 1 becomes 2 0 goes
here. How can we handle this?
Adding for a half adder?
We need to create a half other
that accept instead of two bit 3
bit. So let's design and have
other that accept not only two
bits but also a carry bit.
And then we can design by
attaching to half adder. We
can design an adder is possible
that is able to add binary
numbers with two bits.
And then we can extend it to add
2 binary numbers with three
bits, 4 bits an, etc.
So here is the problem. You
wanna design A using the half
adder but changing the half
adder in order to accept a
carry from outside, which
might goes comes from for
instance previous.
Half Adder then you can call a half
adder that except they carry it
can call it full adder because
not only it can add 2 bits both
we can support adding with
Carry. So it half after that
accept it, carry is called full
adder. So let's design this.
Design A logic circuit.
Add two binary digit bits as
we did for the half adder and
also a carry bit.
So the design principle is the
same as we did for the half
adder. So what is the range of
the input? We have two bits X & y
and plus the carry bit, so 3
input variables. For the output
variable, what are going to be
the? carry final carry for the
full adder and what is this sum
so again for the output.
The output will need a.
We need just let's come here, so
adding three bits, what is going
to be the output range output
range? Gonna be best just one
bit plus a carry.
Here for the S
That's completely truth table 0
+ 0 with the carry 0 Carry is
zero and the sum gonna be 0.
I'm sorry.
All.
If X is 1 and Y is zero and the
carry from the previous one is
0, is sum gonna be 1?
And the carry do as you can
see here, whenever they carry
the previous carry is 0 is. This
is the same as the half adder.
x&y is one Carry gonna
be one and the sum gonna be 0
so? In these rows.
In these rows are this is
exactly as a half adder.
In this next four rows, because
we haven't, we have a carry from
the previous step or from the
previous half adder, so the
carry is 1. So if they carry is
1 and the two bits are zero, 1 +
0 + 0 becomes one, so the sum is
1 and the carry gonna be 0.
Is the Carry is 1?
y is zero and X is 1, so 1
+ 0 + 1 becomes 2. Two is a
remainder zero and the quotient
goes as a carry 1 0.
And the next, if the carry is 1
and y is 1 an exit zero 1 + 1
+ 0 becomes 2.
Zero goes to the
sum and the carry.
And if all the bits are one, so
X is 1, y is 1 and also we
have a carry so one plus was one
becomes three 3 / 2, the
remainder is 1 and the quotient
goes here. One so.
The only case that we have both
one in the output is all the
bits in the input kind of be 1.
Though you could design. So now
let's design the logic circuit
for this. So the first Carrie is
sum of minterm 3.
And five and six and seven
to minterm and 3 5 6 7.
But the sum?
Again, in the first 4 row it
is exclusive or so minterm one
and minterm two
for the 2nd four rows we have.
This is the minterm 4.
minterm 7, so
the next when we have
this sum of mid term, we can
right away design the logic
circuit or before that we have
to minimize it.
So if you are going to
minimize it, we can use the
karnaugh map with three
variables XY and carry. In
the previous I mean step.
For the S, the Sigma midterm
1 2 4 and seven. So this is
the alternate three variable,
karnaugh map 01234567. So those
minterms in the S gonna be
one. So minterm one minterm 2,
four and seven.
For the final carry, given the
carry from the previous step, an
2 bits in the input X&Y.
so.
For the sum, you see that there
is no adjacent cell.
Although it sells or diagonally
adjacent, so we cannot create
the shared region with adjacent
cells to simplify it. So as I
said in the previous lecture,
whenever you see diagonal set,
it hints you that there's no way
to simplify by creating shared
region in the Karnaugh map.
So this is the full form, but
using the Boolean algebra you
know that you can extract the.
Carry. From the previous steps
EP Prime from these two terms.
so by the distributive
postulate, you can extract
this binary variable.
Also, for the CP here, for these
two terms you see that the CP
the carry from the previous step
actually is repeated, so you can
extract it by the distributive.
postulate. And if you look
closely, the inside the
parenthesis. For the first, uh.
term it is a.
The compliment form off the
previous carry. And.
x' a y bar and X or Y
x' which is exclusive or.
We already knew that, so it
means that there is exclusive or
of X&Y then and by the not off
the previous carry.
But this second term, you see
that this is x' and y' or
X&Y so. Whenever both gates are
the same, the output gonna be
one. Either they are both zero
or they are both one.
You already knew that
this is the gate XNOR
or not exclusive or.
So we already know that and
whenever there is a truth table
that if the both input
variables are send out, gonna be
one. This is the exclusive nor.
And again, we already knew that.
Exclusive nor. Is not
of the exclusive or is
kind of not exclusive
or which becomes nor.
Oh, sorry, exclusive.
Uh, it becomes XNOR sorry
this is. I mean if you apply the
nots. On top of the exclusive or
it becomes exclusive nor kind of
not exclusive or which is we put
just after X nor so this is X
nor or exclusive nor.
So.
So we can rewrite this
expression as the C prime
exclusive or with Y or C
in the from the previous step.
X. Exclusive nor with Y, which
is the not of exclusive or
and then if we assume that this
is the Alpha one term and this
is Alpha prime.
So it's kind of a.
C Bar Alpha or C Alpha bar.
So again, this is another
exclusive or.
So we could rewrite this as a
carry exclusive or with Alpha.
And what was the Alpha? The
Alpha was inside the parenthesis
so we can just rewrite back to
its original form.
So you can see that.
S is what this sum. sum of
minterm 1 2 4 and seven based on
the exclusive or gate, it
becomes the exclusive of
previous carry. X&Y.
So basically just apply the
exclusive or on three input.
So we already knew that
exclusive or is associative,
so we can simply drop the
parenthesis. So it means that
just applying the exclusive or on
the X Y and C carriers carry from
the previous step, which means
that we can have an exclusive or
with three inputs.
But for the sake of I mean this,
you will see one, but let's keep
the parenthesis and not drop the
parenthesis. An use do not use
the associativity property of
the exclusive or.
Do you know what's the
reason? I'm not going to
drop the parenthesis.
Any of you can answer in the
chat box or raise your hand?
As I said, although we know that
the exclusive or is associative
so we can drop the parenthesis.
But I prefer to keep them and do
you know what's the reason?
Any of you? The reason is you know
because we are trying.
Associated auto trans issues.
It is associative exclusive
or. I believe it's a lecture
assignment or at home. You can
try it. So if you apply the
C prime exclusive or with y 1st
and then with X is the same as
this so. If you form the truth
table and you can apply the
exclusive or in any order.
Also, it is this a commutative,
so you can change the order of
the exclusive or for instance or
Y is equal to Y exclusive or
with X. So it is also a
commutative and also
associative.
The thing is. Nelson says for
priority again because it is
associative so there is no need
to keep the priority. Yes, with
this parentheses we say that we
have to apply X or Y 1st and
then exclusive with the carry
from the previous step.
Uh, but there's no need for that
because exclusively or is
associative, so we can drop it.
Nelson is kind of right becausw
um, yeah, says X Y are
together in X map.
No, as you can see here, XY,
although we put it in the
column side of the karnaugh
map, but they are not
creating any adjacent cell
their diagonal. The reason
is.
You remember we start this task
to reuse the half adder. OK,
so they half adder has only
exclusive one exclusive or let's
back to be half Adder.
Let's come back to the half
adder. This is the half adder.
So they have other has one
exclusive or an X&Y.
So I keep the parenthesis in
order to reuse the half adder
'cause you already have. The
half adder that does the
exclusive or on the X&Y.
So I just wanted to reuse
that that's why I not drop
the parentheses and keep the
order applied, exclusive or
first on the X&Y and then on
the previous carry.
Oh
that's why I didn't. I don't
drop the parentheses.
Will see in the few on next
slide that, uh, what we mean by
I mean you re using half adder?
Or the Carry if you put the
minterm in on a karnaugh map with three
variable, these are the
minterm 3, minterm 5, minterm 6 and
minterm 7 so you know from the
Karnaugh map you can create a shared
region with adjacent cells
overlapping, this shared region. So
the first is this one. So in
this region the value of the
previous carry doesn't matter
to X&Y, must be one.
In this region,
carry from the previous step is
1. And X must be one. The
value of Y doesn't matter
because the value of Y is
either zero or one in this
region.
So it becomes carry
AND X. But this region
we have carry,
And Y must be one, but the
value of X doesn't matter, so it
becomes carry and Y.
So this is the minimized form of
the carry and then we can design
it. So we already know how to
design the S and how to design
the C. So let's sketch the
logic circuit. So X&Y, exclusive
or with another exclusive OR
with the carry.
And then X&Y.
As you can see here, X AND
previous carry, Y AND
previous carry, so X
And Y, X and previous carry, Y
and previous carry.
And then all of them OR together.
So this is the circuit. So
this is just
represented as this way so.
X and Y comes here.
carry comes here and then sum.
Two exclusive OR
and then carry.
So you can simply just make it a
black box. This is the full
adder, so adding three bits: 2
bits from the binary numbers and
one bit from the previous
carry, and the result gonna be
2 bits sum and the next carry.
But as I said, the reason that I
didn't drop the parenthesis is
that as you can see inside the
full adder, one exclusive OR on
the X&Y and one AND on the X&Y,
this is the half adder.
So you can go to the market and
buy a half adder.
And another exclusive OR gate,
two other AND gates and one or
gate to recreate the full adder.
So that's why I didn't drop the
parenthesis. If I drop the
parentheses then I could apply
for instance X exclusive OR with
the C first and then with the X.
Because the order doesn't
matter, but the reason that I
didn't drop the parantheses,
although I could. But the
thing was that I wanted to.
Reuse the half adder to
build the full adder.
So this is called full adder.
We are using 1 half adder and
two other ANDS, one OR and one
exclusive OR, I create a full
adder that can do the adding of
three bits: 2 bits from the
input numbers and one bit from
the previous carry.
So the next question is that the
1st goal was that
creating a full adder for adding
any binary numbers of more than
one bit using two half adders.
We create a full adder.
As you saw, in the previous exercise.
So X&Y exclusive OR with
Another carry from the
previous step.
This is the sum as we did so
far, but in the previous design,
we could handle the carry.
So X&Y, this carry.
Goe in this one, X and Y AND
with each other both is or with
two other ands?
So if I go to the market and buy
two half adder instead of just
one half adder, is it still
possible to make the full adder?
The answer with respect to this
sum, the sum is correct, because
you can simply attach this,
Uh, the sum output of the half
adder to the first input of the
next half adder.
And then put the carry. I mean
from the previous step in
this second half adder, so it
becomes exclusive OR.
But how about this, carry?
So this carry plus two other
ANDs, but we don't do that.
We don't have two other ANDs,
you have just one AND in the
second half adder.
So the question is that how can
I create a carry, final carry for
a full adder by reusing the
carry from 2 half adders. The first
half adder is X&Y.
The second half adder is the AND
of the previous carry.
AND.
With this X exclusive
or with Y.
Which comes from the previous sum.
So this carry from the second
half adder is this: the half
adder AND previous carry with X exclusive
OR Y.
So is it possible to kind of
come up with a I mean, a
function on top of C1 and
C2 to create
This one?
Create X&Y.
X. This One. X.
AND previous carry.
Y AND previous
carry and then OR.
So this is the question, is it
possible, given two carries from
two half adder to build the
carry for the full adder?
The answer is yes. It's kind of
hard to come up with the I mean,
Function on top of C1 and C2 to
create this. Uh,
the hint is that.
Whenever, when you did the
design for the carry for the
full adder with just one
half adder, you knew that
carry is the sum of minterms
3 5 6 and seven.
And this is that, we just minimize
this region.
This region and this region
carry from the previous digit, it
doesn't matter, X&Y must be one,
so this one.
This is the minimized form, but
for the other two regions, we
don't minimize it. Just revert
back to the normal form.
So in the normal form,
Instead of just minimizing,
the minterm 5,
Six and seven becomes this.
So we have a.
We don't need this minterm
because we already make it
simplified with this region, so
the only other minterms are minterm
5 and minterm 6.
So this is the minterm 6.
Previous carry, Y-bar, and X.
And this is the minterm 6.
This cell.
Previous carry AND with Y and
and X bar. So if you
extract this Cp by the
distributive postulate, We see
that, uh, this term is gonna be
exclusive OR of the X&Y.
So we already knew that
this is the C2.
X exclusive OR with Y and with
the previous carry.
This is C2, the carry from the
second half adder and this
is the carry from the first
half adder.
So we did come up with a
function that can apply on the
carry of two Half Adders in order
to build the carry for the full
adder. So basically, if
you apply the OR on top of
C1 and C2, it creates the
carry for the full adder.
And this is a new full
adder using two half adders. So
the first half adder.
X&Y exclusive OR here with X&Y
carry for the first half adder
and then we attach the sum of
the first half adder to the X
Input of the second half adder.
And then for the
Second input of the second
half adder, we just put the
previous carry.
AND of X plus
Y plus carry plus carry.
And then this comes with the new
S. As the exclusive OR of
This one, which is X
exclusive OR Y and
then exclusive OR with
the previous carry. S. And for the
new carry, new carry is
carry from the first
half adder.
OR with carry from the second
half adder. Based on
this connection.
And this is the carry for the
full adder, so we could design
two types of full
adders. One was this.
Which only uses one half adder,
With additional gates.
New design for the full adder is
this, with two half adders.
This is one half adder. This is the
second half adder and this is
the carrier of these two half
adders. We create the
New carry based on the OR of the
two half adders.
So again. When we make it a black
box, this is exactly the same
as a previous full adder.
Sometimes inside the full adder
there are two half adders.
Sometimes there is only 1 half adder.
So now we can create a logic
circuit that can add 2 bit
plus a carry.
So let's go back to our original
problem, which was designing a
logic circuit that adds two
binary numbers, not only just
two bits. 2 numbers, and
the numbers might be in the
range 0 to 3 or within the range
0 to for instance 16 within
the range 0 to infinity, 0 to N.
So for instance, if you are
given two binary numbers, each
of which has four bits, so.
This is the problem. We want to
add 2 binary numbers, each of
which has four bits.
We can, for the first bit.
We can use the full adder, one
full adder with the carry from
the previous step, 0.
For this second one,
You can use the full adder.
And they carry comes from the
previous addition, previous full
adder and etc.
So kind of stacking full adders.
One for this, the next one, the
third one and the 4th one.
The only difference is that the
first one doesn't have any
carry, so the carry for the
first one is going to be 0 because
there is no previous carry.
And finally we have the S1
up until S4 and the last
carry, which comes from the
last full adder.
So here is the full
adder. Here is the
Logic circuit for adding two binary
numbers, each of which has four
bits. So just stacking the
full adders.
Initially, the carry for
the first full adder is 0
and we just attached carry
from the 1st digit to the
second one and etc.
So if you make it a Black box, it
is called 4 bit add, so this
logical unit is called a 4 bit
adder. Inside we have 4 full
adder. Inside of each full
adder we can have one half adder
plus additional gates or we
can have two half adders by
just connecting the outputs
in a way we showed here.
In a way we showed here.
Oh, finally you can go to the
market and buy the IC for the
four bit adder.
So my question is.
If I'm going to design a logic
circuit to add 2 binary numbers,
Each of which has 8 bits.
How can I? How can we do that?
Anybody can answer in that
box or raise their hand.
So.
Yes, Gabe, actually Gabe says
that 2 four bit. So if you
attach 2 four bit IC with
each other and then they C4
for the first 4 bit
adder goes to the C0 of the
second 4 bit adder. So then
we can add them with each other.
If you can have a few, if you need I
mean for instance a 10 bit adder.
In a 10 bit adder, how
many, uh?
4 bit adders do I need.
Anybody?
So we're going to add 2 binary
numbers, each of the binary
numbers has only 10 bits.
Gabe says that we can have a.
Two and a half?
But the thing is, if you
go to the market, they
already built the IC for the
four bit adder. Actually, let
me show you the
4 bits adder IC.
I just wanted
to show you
More in the market, if you go to
the market. Here is the thing,
you can buy, this one. If you go
to the market, this is the
number for the four bit
adder. 74LS83. So the first
4 bits comes here. The second
4 bits comes here. So X + Y.
This is the
carry 0, carry from the
previous step, and this is
the final carry and this is
the sum. So if you go to the
market, you can buy it, for
instance from the Amazon or
Gigi-Key. So this is $1.
But the thing is, for your
problem, you need to add 2 binary
numbers that has 10 bits.
Yes, I mean Jake said that we
have to change the 10 full adders.
That's correct. So you
have to go to the market and buy
full adders, but let's see if
We can have a full adders
in the market.
As you can see here in the
market, you cannot have full
adders, so the only I mean
available IC is the 4 bits. So
whenever you need to add 2
binary numbers less than four
or that is more than powers of
four. For instance, for the 10
bit adder, you have to buy.
Nico and Justin are actually
correct, it says that you have to
buy 3 four bit adders, so the
three 4 bit adders you gonna
have 3 * 4 = 12
bit adder. But you have to
fill the other extra inputs with
zero. So you have to kind of
pad the extra inputs with zero.
So let's go back to these slides.
So again, I mean if you need for
instance 6 bit adder, you
have to build, you have to STACK
6 full adders. Or if you go to
the market you have to buy 2
four bit adder and then only use
the 1st four bit adder and for the second
four bit adder, you have to
only use two inputs and fill out
the other inputs with zero.
So.
This is the four bit adder, so
let's move on to the next topic,
which is carry propagation.
Any questions so far?
Let me come back here.
Yes padding, not equal. Yes,
you have to pad in order to I
mean add two binary numbers
that are not powers of four.
For instance four, 8, 32.
The number of bits within
this range you have to fill
out with zero.
One thing I actually remember is in
the lecture assignments, one of
the lecture assignments, we said
that padding is kind of tricky
because if you are dealing with
unsigned numbers, you have to
pad it with zero.
But if you are dealing with signed
numbers in twos complements,
you remember you have to. If it
is negative number you have to
pad it with one because you
cannot change the sign of the
binary number, so padding is kind
of tricky. You cannot always pad
with zero. Sometimes if the
number is negative and you are
in the signed two's complement
system, you have to pad with
one if the number is negative.
So any other questions?
So the next topic is Harry
propagation.
Unfortunately, the full adder
we designed has a problem.
So here I just, uh, instead of
just showing the four
Full adders, I just zoom inside
each full adder to I mean again
see what is the inside.
So each full adder have
two half adders.
So the 1st full adder, the second
one, the 3rd and the 4th. So
this is the four bit adder as
we saw before.
The question is, what if the
delay is not zero?
In practice, there is always a
delay for any gates. Assuming
that the gate delay is Delta T.
The question is how long do we
have to wait up until we can see if
the result is stable and this
is the final result?
How long does it
take for us to see that the
S1, S2 and S3 and S4 are
available as the true sum
of the four bit adding.
So. Let's look at the number
of gates in between in order
to see how much time or delta T
we will have to wait to
see the result.
That's for the S1.
As you can see for the S1,
S1 is X1
Y1 exclusive OR.
And then goes to the
second half adder.
And then another exclusive OR
with the previous carry C0.
But we have to wait 2 delta T to
See the S1.
How about S2?
S2 is only connected to this
exclusive OR where one of the
inputs is connected to the
previous half adder. So for the S2 it's the
same, you have to apply the
exclusive OR on the X2 and Y2.
And then another exclusive OR
with previous carry
goes to the C1.
Imagine, uh, we don't.
For now, imagine we don't
need the carry from the C1, so I
mean for the sake of simplicity.
You could say that.
S2, S3 and S4, all of
them without considering the
carry can be applied and
we see the result by just
passing 2 delta T.
Because whenever we do this for
the S1, we can do in parallel
for S2. We can do in parallel for
S3 and we can do in parallel for S4.
Although this calculation is not
correct because S2 is waiting for
the carry from the previous full adder.
Also S3 is waiting
for the carry from the previous
one. But if you do not assume
the carry. If we assume that
the carry is already available.
In parallel, we can see the final
result just by waiting for 2 delta T.
And if we are given a
N bit Adder, so we can do, we
can wait for each of the SI, 2
exclusive OR so 2 delta T.
But again, as I said,
After the S1, for the S2,
Although we can have in parallel
the exclusive order for the bits
in the input,
But for the second half adder, we
have to wait for the carry from
the previous full adder. So
S2, S3 and S4. These are
not just simply 2 delta T.
Also, for the Sn you have to
wait for the charity for the S2, S3
S4 up until Sn-1.
So. Here is the main question,
how long does it take for us to
see the carries, specifically to
see the carriers for the final
carry C4? How long does it take
for the C1, C2, C3 and C4?
So let's see how long
does it take for C4.
So for the C4.
We have to see this is the C4.
C4 depends on exclusive
OR and then AND on then we
need the previous carry
C3. C3 depends on
C2. C2 depends on C1.
So let's see how long does it
take for C1 to see the correct
answer for the C1. So if you see
for the C1,
We do one exclusive OR
on the X1 and Y1 here.
Because, uh.
Because it goes to S and S goes to
the second half adder and then
from the second half adder, we
have to do the AND.
So we need to do this in order
to have the value of this input
of the AND available.
This one. Also we have to
do the AND on top of the
X1 and Y1 here at the AND.
And then also after we have the
exclusive OR result here, you
have to do another AND and then
this. The result of this AND and
the result of this AND is going to
be OR. So, let's
calculate that, so for the first one.
For the AND of the X1 and Y1
here and the exclusive OR
between the X1 and Y1, we can do
this in parallel. So whenever
the exclusive OR is doing, it is
applied. In the meantime, we can
do the AND, so these two can be
done in parallel: 1 delta T.
After that,
You have to do AND of this expression
OR with the previous carry C0,
so this AND.
Another Delta T. And then
finally we have to do the OR, so
another Delta T.
So in total for C1, we need 3 delta T.
Oh sorry 3 delta T (4 is a MISTAKE!).
So these two are in parallel, delta one, and
then these are delta two and then this
OR is delta three. 3 delta T.
For the C2.
We need to wait for the C1.
While we are creating the C1,
we could do the exclusive OR on
the X2 and Y2 and AND on the X2
and Y 2. So we can do
these two gates while we
are creating this C1.
So we already wait 3 delta T for the
C1, so we can do this for 1 delta T
in parallel with the C1, and then
after 3 delta T, we have to do
another AND and another OR so 5 delta
T for the C2.
And therefore the C3.
After we wait for the C2, 5 Delta
T plus AND OR, 7 delta T and
then for the C4, you have to
wait for the three C3 and
then AND OR, so 9 Delta T.
So you see that.
The carry takes time to propagate
from the first full adder to the
last full adder.
And in the same time, but
it is crucial for the carry, but
also it is crucial for the
sum bit. So for the S2 we have to
wait for the C1.
For the S3 we have to wait for
C2 and etc because of
this input in the exclusive
or. So in practice,
you can determine, I mean,
uh, what is the maximum Delta T
we have to wait? For the four bit
full adder, we have to wait until
the last carry actually becomes
stable, which is 9 Delta T.
After 9 Delta T we can make sure
that the result for the carries
and the result for the sum are
stable and correct.
So it takes a lot of time. So.
How about the 8 bit adder?
You have to wait I mean double
time as for the four bit
adder and etc. So the
propagation problem of the
carry actually is a problem.
In the book, in
these pages 138 up until
141.
There is a design, logic circuit
design, that makes the
propagation of carry for all the
full adders constant.
It doesn't make it 0, but
there are still some gates in
between, but it makes it
constant for all the carries,
whether there are carry one,
whether there are carry two, three
up until carry N, only
constant delay actually
needs to to see the correct
result in the output. The method is
called carry lookahead.
Basically, this method actually
tries to produce the carries
before doing the addition.
So it makes, it tries to make
the carry available first and
then do the addition.
So. In this, in the
previous, I mean in the way
we design the full adder,
the latency or
the propagation delay increases
as we add the full adders.
But in this design, in the
carry lookahead. Whatever
number of
Full adders we add, the
propagation delay remains
constant, so please cover
this topic at home. This and
next lecture I'm ready for
if you have any questions
understanding the topics
about the carry lookahead.
So the next question is.
Ah. Building the binary
adder, for instance 4 bit adder,
8 bit adder, so far.
Does it matter when adding signed
integers or unsigned integers?
Anybody can answer this
question.
So far we just add the bits,
we didn't interpret the bits
as a signed integers or
unsigned integers.
So.
I mean introducing the sign
integers, does it need a little bit of
change for our 4 bit adder or
is there no change needed for that?
Anybody can answer that.
In another way, do I have
to design in new Adder for
adding signed integer numbers?
Or we can reuse this adder?
Justin says yes and no. We
can use but have to deal
with carry for sign.
Marco says it does matter.
Well, the thing is, imagine.
We have the signed
integer adder. Imagine we
redesigned the logic circuit
that does the adding for signed
integers. I can use
that design for unsigned
integers because I can all this
unsigned integer can be treated
at signed integers.
For instance, we can assume
the unsigned integers as the
positive integers in the sign
integer system. So if I have the
signed integer system, I can use that
system for unsigned integers.
Simply, I just have to apply. I
mean keep the zero in the highest
significant position in the
bits. For instance, let's go
back to here in this
four. Let's come back.
This 4 bit adder, if I assume
that this 4 bit adder can do
the addition for signed integers
in the two's complement system,
If I want to reuse it for the
unsigned integer, I could say
that I always put the X4 and Y4
as 0. So unsigned integer are
positive integers in the sign
integer system, so it's that simple.
How about the reverse? So is it
possible to use this 4 bit adder
for signed integer?
The thing is, as we saw in the
numbering system, if the system
is sign magnitude,
You cannot use this because in
the sign magnitude, you have to
allocate 1 bit for sign, and
whenever you do the arithmetic,
you have to not consider
that sign position and then
first you have to determine the
sign and then do the normal
addition or subtraction and etc.
However. If you are in a 2's
complement system, in the two's
complement system, there is no
such a story. We just simply add
2 numbers. It is based on our
interpretation that the number
is positive or negative.
You had to see that if the
number is greater than the first
half of the range of the
numbers, it is negative.
Otherwise it is positive. So in
this two's complement system, it
is based on our interpretation
of negative or positive numbers,
but in the hardware or in a
physical sense or in a logic
circuit sense, it doesn't
matter. I mean these are just
zeroes and one.
So the answer is.
For the four bit, let's go back to
the question. For the adding of two
binary numbers, if they are
signed numbers, we assume that
the numbers are in the two's
complement system and in the
two's complement system, we just
simply add the bits. We don't
care about whether they are
positive or negative. After we
see the result, we interpret the
result as a signed negative or
positive. But whenever we do the
addition. It doesn't matter. I
mean if they are positive or
negative because they are in the
two's complement sign system.
So.
Again, I mean, as long as we are
in the two's
complement signed system, the
normal N bit adder can be
applied for adding signed
integers. Signed numbers.
Let's move on to the next topic,
binary subtractor. So if you are
in the Two's complement signed
system, you already knew that X
- Y, if these are two binary
numbers, subtraction becomes.
If the two numbers are, each of
which has N bits. For instance,
X has X1, X2 up until Xn, and Y has
Y1, Y2, up until
Yn. So the subtraction becomes
addition with two's complements.
And addition with two's
complement means addition
with one's complement plus one.
And one's complements was just
NOT each bit, so we have to
apply the NOT operator bitwise
on each of the Y. So it
is kind of X plus NOT of
each bit of Y plus
an initial carry with one,
instead of just 0.
So we can simply use the four
bit adder to do the subtraction.
Basically we put one in the
initial
carry, plus one, and for the
Y, we just simply put the NOT of
Y in each of the input of the
four bit adder. So this
is reusing the four bit
adder for subtraction.
So four bit adder acts like a
subtracter based on the carry.
If they carry is zero and we
put the bits of Y,
It is an adder. If you put the
carry one and then NOT each
bit of the Y, it is act as a
subtractor. So adder.
Subtractor. So, based
on the value of carry. We can
switch between the A and A-bar.
If we use the exclusive OR
gate, any variable exclusive OR
with zero, it is the same, but
exclusive OR with one, it is the
NOT of the bit.
So.
Based on the carry, you can create
an IC which acts like an adder whenever
the carry is 0.
(1 is a MISTAKE!)
The carry zero goes here. Any
number exclusive OR with zero is
the same. If the carry is 1,
carry becomes one and any
binary bit with exclusive
OR with one makes it NOT.
So here comes Y1-bar
Y2-bar, etc. And it
acts like its subtractor.
Doctor Fani. Yes. It's 9:53.
Oh, thank you so we are done
with today's topics, so think
about I mean binary subtractor
with unsigned integers and see
whether it matters, or see if we can use
the four bit adder/subtracter
for unsigned integer or not.
And the next topic we're gonna
cover next is gonna be overflow.
The only thing that matters in the
arithmetic in the two's
complement is the overflow.
That's the main important
things. Otherwise for the
addition or subtraction, it's
very simple. Addition is just
adding bits. Subtraction is just
just adding with the NOT of the
bits plus one.
But the only thing that matters is
the overflow that we are
going to cover next lecture.
So thank you so much for your
attention and sorry about I
mean the 4 minutes
after the 9:50. I'm waiting
for your questions in the
office hour if you have any
and also in here. I mean I'm
done. Thank you so much for
your attention and have a
great day!